URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-019-11738-0?error=cookies_not_supported&code=2642763b-a383-49ad-a50d-903788af002e
Title: Metabolic landscape of the tumor microenvironment at single cell resolution | Nature Communications
Untrusted webpage text:
Metabolic landscape of the tumor microenvironment at single cell resolution | Nature Communications Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Saved research Search Account Log in Content Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature nature communications articles article Metabolic landscape of the tumor microenvironment at single cell resolution Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 21 August 2019 Metabolic landscape of the tumor microenvironment at single cell resolution Zhengtao Xiao ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-5535-5381 1 , Ziwei Dai ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-0858-638X 1 & Jason W. Locasale ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-7766-3502 1 Nature Communications volume 10 , Article number: 3763 ( 2019 ) Cite this article Save article View saved research 64k Accesses 515 Citations 86 Altmetric Metrics details Abstract The tumor milieu consists of numerous cell types each existing in a different environment. However, a characterization of metabolic heterogeneity at single-cell resolution is not established. Here, we develop a computational pipeline to study metabolic programs in single cells. In two representative human cancers, melanoma and head and neck, we apply this algorithm to define the intratumor metabolic landscape. We report an overall discordance between analyses of single cells and those of bulk tumors with higher metabolic activity in malignant cells than previously appreciated. Variation in mitochondrial programs is found to be the major contributor to metabolic heterogeneity. Surprisingly, the expression of both glycolytic and mitochondrial programs strongly correlates with hypoxia in all cell types. Immune and stromal cells could also be distinguished by their metabolic features. Taken together this analysis establishes a computational framework for characterizing metabolism using single cell expression data and defines principles of the tumor microenvironment. Similar content being viewed by others Advances in measuring cancer cell metabolism with subcellular resolution Article 25 August 2022 Metabolic determinants of tumour initiation Article 29 November 2022 Computational modeling of cancer cell metabolism along the catabolic-anabolic axes Article Open access 10 May 2025 Explore related subjects Discover the latest articles and news in related subjects. Cancer genomics Cancer metabolism Introduction Metabolic reprogramming in cancer cells supports specific demands for energy, biomass, redox maintenance, and cellular communication 1 . Cellular metabolism is shaped by both genetic and environmental factors including the somatic driver mutations selected during tumor evolution, the tissue of origin, and the local nutrient environment 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 . Given the importance of environmental factors, tumor metabolism exhibits grossly different properties in laboratory cell culture settings than in vivo. Differences in the metabolism of humans and model organisms are also substantial. Nevertheless, most conclusions surrounding tumor metabolism have been obtained using cell culture models and model organisms and the number of direct observations of cellular metabolism are few. Indeed, nearly all observations of human tumor metabolism in vivo have been conducted using measurements obtained from bulk tumors. These findings have advanced our understanding of tumor metabolism tremendously. Nevertheless, they do result from a population average over the genetic and environmental variables of each cell. There are numerous sources of intratumoral heterogeneity. Tumor cells exist within a microenvironment consisting of stromal cells such as cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), immune cells, endothelial cells and many others. Each of these cell types takes an active role in tumor cell proliferation. For example, CAFs may release cytokines and growth factors that are received by and function to signal in cancer cells 6 . The immune compartment of an established malignant tumor is collectively immunosuppressive 7 . Endothelial cells provide vasculature to provide nutritional support in challenging environments 8 . Each cell type has unique metabolic demands that enable specific function. In addition to the unique metabolic demands of each cell type, each cancer experiences a distinct nutrient environment, distinct engagement of extracellular signals, and may derive from a different cell of origin thus possibly having distinct mutational patterns 9 . Therefore at the cellular level, each cell within the tumor is likely to have a different metabolic status 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 . Nevertheless, direct observations of cellular metabolism in vivo at the single-cell level is difficult. Most conclusions about the nature of the tumor microenvironment have relied on in vitro models such as co-culture systems 14 , 15 , 16 or measurements of single variables such as immunohistochemical staining for the expression of a metabolic enzyme 17 . Metabolism and its associated phenotypic biology are governed by the concentrations of metabolites and the rates or fluxes by which one metabolite is converted to another. A comprehensive understanding of metabolism requires knowledge of both concentrations and fluxes. These measurements are difficult to obtain in humans and have so far been exclusively conducted in bulk tumors. Global gene expression however is readily measurable and the advent of single-cell sequencing technologies enables expression profiling of individual cells within entire tissues or tumors 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 . It is also an indirect means of assessing metabolism. Nevertheless, gene expression has provided many insights into metabolic pathway activity and in many documented instances the gene expression is predictive of metabolic flux 24 , 25 . Thus single-cell sequencing could provide some insight into metabolism at the single-cell level in human tumors. In this study, we analyze metabolic gene expression profiles of more than 9000 single cells from two representative human tumor types including melanoma 20 and squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (HNSCC) 22 . We find that activities of metabolic pathways in malignant cells are in general more active and plastic than those in non-malignant cells, and the metabolic features of single cancer cells are poorly captured by measurements done with bulk tumors. Variation in mitochondrial activity is the major contributor to the metabolic heterogeneities among both malignant cells and non-malignant cells, and, strikingly, the activities of glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation both correlate with hypoxia at the single-cell level. We also identify metabolic features of different immune and stromal cell subtypes and find patterns distinct from behaviors of these cells in ex vivo culture conditions. These findings begin to unravel principles of how malignant transformation affects the metabolic phenotypes of tumor and non-tumor cells within the tumor microenvironment. Results Landscape of metabolic gene expression at single-cell level We developed a computational pipeline for analyzing metabolic gene expression profiles at the single-cell level (Fig. 1a , Methods). In brief, we applied missing data imputation and data normalization to gene expression profiles to account for the influence of technical noise. We then characterized the global structure of single-cell metabolic programs using clustering analysis, identified cell type-specific metabolic programs using quantitative metrics we developed, and designed algorithms for quantitation of metabolic heterogeneity of malignant and non-malignant cells. We applied this pipeline to two single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) datasets for human melanoma 20 and HNSCC 22 , which include an expansive set of gene expression of 4054 cells and 5502 cells respectively (Methods). These datasets were selected because they covered the largest numbers of cells and included detailed annotation of the cell types, while many of the currently available scRNA-seq datasets for human cancer are limited by cell number and sequencing depth. Each dataset covers both malignant and non-malignant cells isolated from patient-derived human tumors with different genotypic and phenotypic backgrounds (Fig. 1b, c ), thus enabling an in-depth investigation of the expression of metabolic genes and pathways in each cell type. Fig. 1 Full size image Landscape of metabolic gene expression at single-cell level. a Schematic representation of the scRNA-seq data analysis pipeline. b Numbers of each type of cells in the melanoma dataset. c Numbers of each type of cells in the head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) dataset. d t-SNE plot of metabolic gene expression profiles of malignant cells from the melanoma dataset. The color of each dot indicates the tumor which the cell comes from. e Same as in d but for the HNSCC dataset. f Clustered correlation matrix showing Spearman’s rank correlation coefficients of metabolic gene expression profiles between malignant cells in the melanoma dataset. g Same as in f but for the HNSCC dataset. h t-SNE plot of metabolic gene expression profiles of non-malignant cells from the melanoma dataset. The color of each dot indicates the tumor which the cell comes from. i Same as in h but for the HNSCC dataset We first analyzed the global structure of metabolic gene expression in these two datasets using t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) 26 based on expression levels of 1566 metabolic genes (Methods). Imputation of zero values was performed before applying t-SNE to correct for the influence of the high frequency of dropout events (i.e. failure in detecting expressed genes due to low sequencing depth) in certain cell types (Methods). The imputation effectively reduced the dropout rates in all cell types (Supplementary Fig. 1a–d ) without changing the pattern of the metabolic gene expression (Supplementary Fig. 1e, f ). Clustering analysis after dimensionality reduction with t-SNE showed that metabolic gene expression profiles of the malignant cells formed distinct clusters that corresponded to their tumors of origin (i.e. from which tumor the cell was derived) for both melanoma (Fig. 1d ) and HNSCC (Fig. 1e ), suggesting that metabolic gene expression in malignant cells is largely set by patient-specific factors. This was further corroborated by the higher correlation coefficients of metabolic gene expression profiles between malignant cells from tumors within the same patient (average Spearman’s correlation = 0.91) than those between cells from tumors from different patients (average Spearman’s correlation = 0.79, Fig. 1f, g ). Cells from patients of the same genotypic background also showed higher similarity than those from different genotypic backgrounds (average Spearman’s correlation = 0.87 compared to 0.79 for melanoma, 0.87 compared to 0.77 for HNSCC, Fig. 1f, g ). In contrast, metabolic gene expression profiles of non-malignant cells showed no distinguishable differences between patients (average difference between intratumoral and intertumoral Spearman’s correlation = 0.01 for non-malignant cells in melanoma and 0.007 for those in HNSCC, Fig. 1h, i ), indicating that metabolism of these normal cells in the tumor microenvironment exhibits no observable interpatient heterogeneity. Similar trends were also observed for the distributions of correlation coefficients of metabolic gene expression between cells from the same patient or different patients, in which only malignant cells showed significantly stronger intratumoral correlation than intertumoral correlation (Supplementary Fig. 2 ). We next repeated the t-SNE analysis on a randomly selected set of genes (Supplementary Fig. 3a–d ) and the complete set of genes (Supplementary Fig. 3e–h ) and found that the clustering patterns of these gene sets were similar (relative mutual information close to 1, Supplementary Table 1 , Supplementary Methods ) to that of the metabolic genes, implying that the metabolic plasticity of malignant cells reflects their intrinsic flexibility in gene expression program that influences both metabolic and non-metabolic genes. Taken together, these results suggest that malignant cells exhibit higher metabolic plasticity which likely leads to patient-specific metabolic reprogramming of cancer cells but not the supporting cells in the tumor microenvironment. Cell type-specific metabolic reprogramming We next sought to identify the overall features of metabolic pathway variation among the different cell types, especially between malignant and non-malignant cells. To quantify the activity of a metabolic pathway, we developed a pathway activity score defined as the relative gene expression value averaged over all genes in this pathway and all cells of this type (Fig. 2a, b , Methods). To enable comparison between different cell types, we normalized the gene expression values using a deconvolution method 27 which resulted in the highest similarity of normalized expression value distributions between cell types among four commonly used data normalization methods (Supplementary Fig. 4 , Methods). Among the 80 metabolic pathways with at least 5 genes included, over 70 were more highly expressed (pathway activity score >1 and permutation test p -value < 0.01) in at least one cell type compared to other cell types, indicating that the activities of most metabolic pathways are determined by cell type. As an example, the differential expression of oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) and glycolysis across cell types was further supported by directly comparing distributions of the mean expression level of genes within these pathways across different cell types (one-way ANOVA p -value < 0.01 for both datasets, Supplementary Fig. 5 ). To further characterize the cell type-specific metabolic features, we grouped the metabolic pathways into 11 categories based on KEGG classifications (Supplementary Fig. 6a, b ), and assessed enrichment of each category in pathways up-regulated in each cell type using a one-sided Fisher’s exact test. These categories reflected different aspects of cellular metabolism such as carbohydrate metabolism, amino acid metabolism and nucleotide metabolism. To our surprise, most categories (11 out of 11 for melanoma and 10 out of 11 for HNSCC) were not enriched in pathways up-regulated in a specific cell type (i.e. one-sided Fisher’s exact p -value > 0.05 for all cell types, Supplementary Fig. 6c, d ), indicating that each cell type undergoes global up- or down-regulation of metabolic pathways in all categories. Malignant cells had the largest number of metabolic pathways significantly up-regulated in both melanoma (45 pathways up-regulated in malignant cells compared to 20 in cancer-associated fibroblasts, 22 in macrophages and <10 in all other cell types, Fig. 2a , Supplementary Data 1 ) and HNSCC (56 pathways up-regulated in malignant cells compared to 28 in fibroblasts, 24 in macrophages, 11 in B cells and <10 in all other cell types, Fig. 2b , Supplementary Data 1 ), and the up-regulated pathways included many different parts of cellular metabolism such as central carbon metabolism, one carbon metabolism, methionine metabolism, steroid biosynthesis, and beta-alanine metabolism. Thus, compared to non-malignant cells, malignant cells undergo a global up-regulation of metabolic activity. Importantly, the global up-regulation was only observed for metabolic pathways but not for non-metabolic pathways (median value of non-metabolic pathway activities close to 1 for all cell types, Supplementary Fig. 6e–g ). Interestingly, comparison of pathway activities between melanoma and HNSCC in the cell types shared by the two datasets (Supplementary Fig. 6h ) revealed high concordance between the two tumor types in the metabolic features of T cells (Spearman’s correlation = 0.58, p -value = 3.6e-8), malignant cells (Spearman’s correlation = 0.45, p -value = 4.9e-5), endothelial cells (Spearman’s correlation = 0.43, p -value = 1.2e-4) and macrophages (Spearman’s correlation = 0.44, p -value = 6.9e-5), while metabolic pathway activities of B cells and fibroblasts correlated poorly between the two tumor types (Spearman’s correlation < 0.1, p -value > 0.01 for both cell types), suggesting that metabolism of these cell types is more sensitive to environmental factors and the effector status of these immune cells. Fig. 2 Full size image Cell type-specific metabolic reprogramming. a Metabolic pathway activities in cell types in the melanoma dataset. Statistically non-significant values (random permutation test p > 0.05) are shown as blank. b Metabolic pathway activities in cell types in the HNSCC dataset. Statistically non-significant values (random permutation test p > 0.05) are shown as blank. c Metabolic pathway activities in HNSCC tumor samples and matched adjacent normal samples from TCGA computed based on bulk RNA-seq data. The color bar on the top marks the pathways with similar activity changes in single malignant cells compared to single non-malignant cells and bulk tumors compared to normal tissue samples. d Scatter plot comparing pathway activities between bulk HNSCC tumors in TCGA and single malignant cells in the HNSCC scRNA-seq dataset. e Difference between bulk and single-cell RNA-seq in characterizing gene expression profiles in tumors. f Distributions of pathway activities in different cell types from the HNSCC scRNA-seq dataset (left) and in bulk tumors and normal samples from TCGA (right) To evaluate whether patterns of pathway activities in single malignant cells were consistent with the more commonly used transcriptomic profiling of bulk tissue samples, we computed pathway activity scores based on RNA-seq data for bulk tumor samples and matched normal tissue samples from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) 28 and compared the results to our analysis in single malignant cells. Since there are no matched normal samples for melanoma in the TCGA database, here we only considered the HNSCC dataset which contains 43 paired tumor and normal samples 29 . First, to confirm that the gene expression values in TCGA bulk tumors are comparable to tumors in the single-cell RNA-seq dataset, we reconstructed bulk gene expression profiles for tumors in the single-cell dataset by pooling gene expression profiles of all single cells derived from one tumor. We then compared them to those in the TCGA database to show that the reconstructed bulk tumors, but not the negative control that we generated by pooling 500 single T cells, showed a very strong correlation of gene expression levels with the TCGA tumor samples (average Pearson’s R = 0.77 for reconstructed bulk tumors compared to 0.69 for pooled T cells, Supplementary Fig. 7 ), suggesting that tumor samples in the single-cell dataset and those in TCGA are approximately equivalent. We found 6 pathways up-regulated and 34 pathways down-regulated in tumor samples compared to normal samples (Permutation test p -value < 0.01, Fig. 2c ). Among these pathways, only 24 showed a consistent pattern of activity in single malignant cells and bulk tumors (Fig. 2c ). Notably, 25 out of the 56 pathways up-regulated in the single malignant cells were identified as down-regulated in tumors based on the bulk RNA-seq, and the pathway activities correlated poorly (Pearson’s R = −0.14, p -value = 0.22) between bulk tumors and single malignant cells (Fig. 2d ). The discrepancy between single-cell and bulk RNA-seq in identifying tumor-associated metabolic pathway activities is likely due to the intrinsic heterogeneity in cellular composition of the tumors (Fig. 2e ). Bulk RNA-seq measures the average expression levels over a mixture of different cell types thus masking the difference between cell types in the same sample. This was further supported by an analysis of the distributions of pathway activities in single cells and bulk samples showing higher variation of pathway activities between different types of single cells than between bulk tumors and normal tissues (average standard deviation of pathway activities = 0.27 for single cells compared to 0.14 for bulk samples, Fig. 2f ). The higher metabolic activity and variation in single malignant cells compared to bulk tumors was further confirmed by comparison of metabolic pathway activities between single malignant cells and reconstructed bulk tumors (one-sided Wilcoxon’s rank-sum test p -value = 2.5e-5 for melanoma and 4.6e-4 for HNSCC, Kolmogorov-Smirnov test p -value = 2.9e-5 for melanoma and 8.7e-5 for HNSCC, Supplementary Fig 8 ). Taken together, these results reveal a global enhancement of metabolic activity in single malignant cells which can only be detected with gene expression profiling at the single-cell level. Intratumoral metabolic heterogeneity of malignant cells In addition to the common routes of metabolic reprogramming in malignant cells, metabolism is also affected by a location-specific, fluctuating nutrient supply and interactions with other neighboring cells in space. It is thus intriguing to investigate what parts of cellular metabolism are impacted by these environmental factors. To identify major contributors to intratumoral metabolic heterogeneity of malignant cells (i.e. variation of metabolism among malignant cells from the same tumor), we performed principal component analysis (PCA) and gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) 30 to identify metabolic pathways enriched in genes explaining most of the variance among malignant cells in each tumor (Fig. 3a , Supplementary Fig. 9 ). We found that for both melanoma and H